What about re-arming Germany in the early 1950s?
You were there, and did you participate? What was
your role? I guess my role was trying to build a U.S.
Seventh Army from 55,000 up to 225,000 at the time,
and fitting that buildup into
the
into West Germany as cheaply as possible by using
old German facilities
because of the great expense and at the same time
that being tactically unsound in some instances
but because of money I was troubled with finding
places so we had to use what we could find
available. And then to see the German army come in
and the German government build brand new
facilities, brand new barracks, brand new motor
pools, brand new living areas and so on and so forth
for them. And here the conqueror was taking the
crap, the old stuff that they had discarded and The
victor was taking that and the loser was getting
brand new stuff and being tactically deployed
where it's to his advantage. The
philosophy and the principle behind re-arming a
germ is absolutely supportable and durable and
that's the way it ought to be. and unfortunately it
hasn't lessened our effort over there or
expenditure which has been very disturbing to me
that as we Germans have built five hundred
thousand and twelve divisions
as you know they have a draft for sixteen months
fifteen sixteen months They have no
responsibilities outside of West Germany, so
they get proper utilization out of 15 to 16 months
of conscription. And then those chaps, after they
leave, go into the reserve in what they call the
territorial forces, and they become a part of the
defense effort, a very strong part of the defense
effort.
Right today, their tanks and trucks are all
maintained by the manufacturer, so they don't
have a long logistics tail. In other words, the Mon
10-ton truck
maintained by that civilian corporation. At the
time of conflict, their constitution states that
80% of the industrial effort will go toward
maintenance of the armed forces. So you've got a
pretty strong logistic base there that's working
every day commercially, and that makes it a very
strong force, I think. With the territorials,
they could probably expand to 24 or 25 divisions or
more without any trouble with people that are
trained. They're very well organized. And I think
it's a direction, I think it's an appropriate
direction to go. And as I say, I only wish that
there's some way that we could have withered on
some of our strength there. On the other hand, in
this world in which we live today, is my firm
conviction and view that the further our front
lines are away from our shores, the better off we
are. It's bad enough with a range of weapons today.
It's bad enough with strategic weapons. But
you've got Soviet submarines floating around out
here that can reach Dallas, Texas without any
trouble with a nuclear warhead. can hit Houston
with no problem at all from submarines that are
floating out there. 1,500-2,000
mile capability. You've got the MiG-23s and
MiG-25s down in Cuba that can come into the Florida
area any day they want to.
We have one airplane that can touch the MiG-25 and
that's a SR-71 and our SR-71 carries no weapons so
you don't kill MiG-25s with cameras. So this is the
seriousness of the situation today and I only
mention that to point out that NATO is a durable and
workable viable organization so long as
everybody over there does its part and that the
United States is not saddled with the whole
burden. And I have felt all along that the trend was
toward get as much out of the United States before
you do anything, you see, because they're a soft
nation. They're an undisciplined group of people
that are very soft and want everybody to love them
so they'll spend money to get somebody to love
them, you see. They'll give millions and billions
of dollars to somebody, oh, if you'll just love us,
you know. But love isn't worry, it's respect, and
respect comes from being a tough bunch of
bastards, and we're not that way. So everybody's
gouging us. Now, getting back to your first
assignment as commander of the Special Troops
Regiment, I was wondering why were you called
Special Troops? What was special about you
people? It's special because it was not a combat
table of organization. It is a special
organization to meet the requirements of a high
headquarters. In other words, on my personnel
reports each day, I carried all the generals and
the colonels and that sort of stuff, and all the
senior sergeants, everybody in that
headquarters carried a couple thousand of them, a
thousand or more. And then you had special
intelligence of several different types of
units. you had special security in there.
So, there's nothing, that headquarters, those
troops, there's nothing consistent with
anywhere else that was designed to support that
particular mission, you see. During this period,
you were there during a very fascinating period of
rebuilding in Germany, By 1947, we had
promulgated the Marshall Plan and we started
pumping money for the next year into the country,
quite a bit of money from 48 down to 52. What were the
relationships that you had with the German people
while this rebuilding was going on?
We had almost daily contact. some aspect of German
society.
They had a large number of German workers, some
German clerks in the headquarters, some German
people with responsibility for maintenance of
facilities, labor force. We had relationships
with a with a mayor's where we had, and a
Burgermeister's where we had troops
stationed, and each small installation had a
relationship with the German community. We took
on, the Army took on a responsibility for setting
up German-American clubs for the soldiers for
bringing in German families into the military
organization for Sunday lunches and dinners and
socials and the
relationships were growing continuously. We got
involved in helping the ladies clubs, got
involved with German ladies in running care
centers for the disabled German people and
providing food and clothing and that sort of
thing. And we took on even a more intense role of
community relations than you find here amongst
our people right now because I don't know the name
of that neighbor over there, but you did in
Germany. How did the German people respond to you,
the conqueror? I thought they responded in this
sort of fashion. After the war is over, you could
not find one single Nazi in Germany. You didn't
survive unless you were one, you see? So that was
their attitude and we looked over our shoulder and
accepted that.
So we got along very well. Miss
Hollingsworth could speaks in German and read
German and we had a few incidences which were
embarrassing such as Miss Hollingsworth and I
trout fishing in a stream and we're doing very well
and then she gets tired and goes back to the
automobile to rest and I'm continuing to fish and
I've come to an area and And the trout just seemed
like it was just loaded with trout. And a German
Jägermeister, I find out who he was later, was
hollering in there saying, no, no, no fishing
here. So I stepped back to the car and I said,
there's some German down here yelling at me. And
said, I wish you'd come down here and tell him to get
on his way or find out what the hell he wants. So she
came down and she said, I don't have to ask him. She
said, you're fishing in a fish hatchery. I said,
well I thought they were biting pretty good here.
So she apologized to him and I left.
Well, That's the best fishing you ever had. Yeah,
oh, man, they were really strong. Every time I
threw a spinner out there, I was bringing in about a
10-inch German brown. There were just plenty of
them in there. And they were hungry, too. Oh, they
were hungry.
But I thought the relationships, you know, it's a
very difficult thing, not so much for soldiers.
After a battle is over and it's on the force, a
soldier can sit down and smoke a cigarette
together and if they can understand the same
language, they have no hard feelings about it.
Because they're just doing what they ordered to
do. But not so much
with the young and the old and the civilian side of
things.
I would say it's more difficult for them. They
suffered tremendously. They suffered from a lack
of food, a variety of food, and the discomfort of
not being able to do what they like to do. In the case
of Germany, Germans mostly work. They all go on
vacation in August. County did in August, because
everybody goes on vacation in August. Shores,
stores closed, everything closed. Bare
essentials go on. Well, that didn't happen for
them during the war years. And nothing that was
going on, as far as I'm concerned, they enjoyed at
all. So now that the war is over and what they had
lived for all their lives, much of it had been
destroyed and blown away. Their fields and farms
were bombs and potholes. Now, while you were
there, of course, Korea, the Korean conflict
started. Did you want to go to Korea? Did you
volunteer for that? I volunteered for Korea, but
since I was Chief of Operations, General Eddy, who
was the Army Lieutenant General, Manton S. Eddy, a
magnificent gentleman, EDDY, Manton S. Eddy, he
felt this way about it. He said, why do you want to
leave me here when you're building up this force
here for me and run off to Korea? And I said, well,
there's war going on there. And he said, what
you're doing here is trying to prevent one. So
which is important, trying to prevent one or go try
to put out a fire when one started? He said, you're
going to stay here, young man. So I said, yes, sir,
I'll stay here. And then, lo and behold,
we get a message in within a week or so saying, you
have been selected for the Command and General
Staff College. So, I didn't have any choice about
that. Well, that's quite an honor. Yes, and
particularly selected the head of my
contemporaries.
So that was in August of 1951 until June of 1952.
Let's talk about the Command and General Staff
School. Wasn't this, when was it instituted?
third or fourth class of that? Well, actually the
Command and General Staff College goes way back.
Oh, I'm thinking of something else now. Yeah,
you're talking about the Army War College. That's
what I'm thinking about. But Command and General
Staff College is probably the most important
school in the military arts there is in the world
because—and I say world because that's where a lot
of the students come from, from the world—less
communist nations. It takes you and
says you're going to—it
would appear those who are selected The record
says you're going to high staff positions and
command positions.
And that's why it says command and the staff up at
the division level. In other words, the command of
a division and staff at the Department of the Army
level. And it is the equivalent of a master's
degree in our school system. Our advanced course
is the equivalency of a baccalaureate degree in
military art and science. Command and General
Staff College is the equivalent of a master's
degree in military art and sciences. The Army War
College is the equivalent of a Ph.D. in military
art and science. And as you higher you go, The more
selective and the fewer, they get a chance to go.
And if you don't go, you just remember that your
career is going to be short lived. And no question
about that. You'll get to be maybe a lieutenant
colonel unless you get a command general staff
school and you're out at that year twenty or if
you're a reserve officer you may be released long
before that. If you do go to command, you're on
staff.
You can probably count on being promoted to
colonel if you do well. Tell me about the
curriculum. Curriculum is a very intense day in,
day out, a lot of night work.
gets deeply involved in the leadership of people,
management,
transportation, finance,
logistics,
tactical considerations,
political
aspects of
land and business management. It is a long,
intense, hard year. How many were in your class?
There was six hundred in my class, including
foreign students. And what nations were they
usually from? Canada, New Zealand, all the
commonwealth nations, New Zealand, India,
Pakistan, Korea, now Japanese,
Brazil,
sometimes Peru, sometimes Argentina. Mexico? It
used to be Ethiopia, Mexico. When I was there, I
think there were about forty nations there. But
the Brits, Canadians, New Zealand, Commonwealth
nations have two or three there. And we do the same
thing for them.
But it's a very intense program requiring a lot of
night work. Now you said that you weren't a very
good student at A&M. Were you a very good student at
this school? in the top ten percent of this school.
What was the difference?
Time to study, time to concentrate on it. I didn't
have to spend eight hours of work a day. I see. I
didn't spend any. As a matter of fact, I played golf
at three o'clock every day,
and met all the requirements
It's, and I must say, it's not very easy in school.
And from there you became an instructor at West
Point. Yes, I- That certainly didn't set you up for
a command position, did it? No, but during the life
of the military, let's see, where were we? You were
talking about during the life of the military. I
said I didn't set you up for a command position.
You're off to West Point. Yeah. Again, I wanted to
go to Korea. Oh, you put in for Korea? I put in for
Korea, and they turned me down. And I found out that
the man responsible for me going to with being
selected for West Point was General Maxwell D.
Taylor, who was the chief of operations and plans
in the Department of the Army who selected the
people to go. And at the same time, amongst the
officers in the Army, there is a requirement to do
civilian component duty. In other words, to go to
ROTC or to go work with the reserves or go to
National Guard or go to United Nations or some
other place, ROTC is a key one which has not been
given all the credit it ought to have and the
caliber of people in every instance it ought to
have. So you knew that you were up for a position
like that. You were probably overdue. I was
overdue, way overdue. I've never asked for an
assignment except to go to combat and I've never
objected to one. So off I went to West Point and
found out that General Taylor was responsible for
that. Did you later get to know General Taylor? Oh
yes. I was at West Point, and in December, I guess,
of 1953, I got a call from the
Department of the Army saying that General
Matthew B. Ridgeway The Supreme Allied Commander
had been appointed Chief of Staff in the Army, and
you were to report to his office for duty on a, on
very short notice in December of 1953. And I didn't
want to leave West Point because I loved those
cadets. They were just absolutely magnificent.
In fact, two of those cadets worked for my company
that I have in Washington right now. And they were
just absolutely the most marvelous bunch of young
men I've ever associated with. And the West Point,
the whole life up there, they treated Miss
Hollingsworth and our son, Jamo, just
absolutely. I met Vince Lombardi there, Lince
Lombardi, yeah, and Earl Blake was there, and
every time I got down a chance to go down and talk to
them, I did. As a matter of fact, I taught handball
there at West Point. I was responsible for the
pistol team. I was responsible for the fishing and
hunting at West Point on the reservation for the
cadets. I enjoyed that very much. So I went to
Washington. So that's what you were instructing?
I was an instructor in tactics and leadership, but
I did all these other side things. You do those
extracurricular things, so to speak, without
pay, but that's the way it goes. But I
went to Washington and
then very And you met Ridgway, right? Yeah, then a
very interesting occurred. Well, what happened
as far as Ridgway? Well, um, John Ridgway decided
that he could more or less, he retired or left on his
own accord because of conflict with Eisenhower
and engine Charlie Wilson. And I was deeply
involved. I was one of the five colonels that
revolted against the President of the United
States and the Secretary of Defense. Was this a
so-called colonel's revolt? Colonel's revolt.
And you were in on that? Oh, I was one of the key
members of it. Well, let's talk about that. I can't
talk too much about it. Well, you could give me a
basic outline of how it came about and your role.
Basic outline, uh, I don't want to say too much
about it because there's some high-level people
that, uh, in government today, in the legislative
branch, in the retired status that, uh, it's best
not be said, uh, the whole story until, uh, And
because I'm just that way about it, I will say that
it came about as,
in my view—I'll just put it this way and not
implicate what happened—in my view, it all came
about as a result
The grand old Big Bang for the buck. What's good for
General Motors is good for the United States. A fat
bird dog won't hunt, and people are like bird dogs.
All of Wilson's cliches. All of Wilson's cliches.
And Eisenhower... I now are trying to destroy the
army. We don't need any army. We don't need a
tactical air force. All you need is strategic
bombers and missiles, and that's all. And it's
obvious to anybody that's got any sense and any
responsibility to this country to know that which
has been a proven fact that by God you do need an army
and you need a navy and you need an air force and you
need all elements of both of them in order to defend
this country and this country deserves that and it
wasn't getting that and that's the reason why I
participated in the colonel with the other four to
revolt against this stuff. And we did it pretty
effectively. We got caught up with it on the 26th of
April, 1955, or 1956.
We got caught up with it and we were all threatened
with court martial.
And you've got to be, if you're going to get
involved in this sort of thing, I'll just put it
this way, you've got to be smart enough to take care
of it and look at the option of getting caught and
what you do about it. So you just create a fire in the
Pentagon and burn everything. If I'd have been in
the White House, Mr. Nixon never would have had to
resign because I'd have burned these damn tapes
whether he didn't want to or not.
So this thing, as a result of it,
We got a handle on tactical air support. We got the
mobility we needed for the Army and helicopters.
We still got a long ways to go, but we reversed the
trend of destruction of the Army and the
destruction of the tactical air force. We got
C-130s, 141s, we got C-5As.
Now, we haven't been totally happy with
everything that we got, but we turned the trend
back from destruction of the Army and depending on
the Strategic Air Command and the nuclear,
strategic nukes,
the one of bringing some sense and balance to
what's needed to defend the country. You need
several options. You need a fulfillment of the
present options we have and a continuous
readiness and a continuous modernization of the
strategic capability of the conventional
deterrent capability
and theater nuclear, tactical nuclear
capability, and one in which we just lost in the
Congress again, a chemical offensive
capability, which the Soviets, our opponents,
have and we don't have. So they could exercise that
option against us, and we have no capability to
exercise the same option against them. because he
was killed just a few days ago in the Congress. Now,
as far as the colonel's revolt is concerned, could
you give me a little bit more specifics just on your
own role? We don't have to talk about the other men.
My role was to cover the Congress.
To pass to them selected
groups what we were up to. At this time you were in
the Pentagon as the chief of the liaison division.
So you were working with the congressman and you
were the liaison between the Pentagon. Yes. Okay.
During the Army. Chief of Staff, I was in the Chief
of Staff's office. You represented— I was the
secretary of the Army. Yeah, right. Those are the
two guys I represented on the Hill. Okay. Let's go
more into your role and how this transpired for
you. My role was one of working about 18 hours a day,
meeting
with the other colonels who had different
responsibilities,
and putting together the kind of an army that we
felt we needed in order to defend the country.
The Eisenhower approach was a pentomic army. Let
me give you a good example of what he was talking
about. Pentomic army, division, pentomic
division.
Pentomic Division was five battalions of
infantry
plus one battery of artillery for each of those
five battalions
and the supporting element for them. And five
batteries of artillery in a division and only five
battalions? That's not a division. That's about a
good brigade, less the artillery it really needs.
Well, let's look at five battalions.
Say there's 1,000 men in each battalion, actually
750 infantrymen in each battalion. That's five
times 750.
What is the strength of a regular division at that
time? 15,000 to 18,000. How many battalions of
infantry? Six battalions of infantry, four tank
battalions, or two tank battalions,
plus four battalions of artillery, four times 18.
That's what we went from down to the pandemic, a
total destruction of capability. And I couldn't
stand that. Nobody could stand that. So we set out
to
save an army. And one of the key areas to save the
army is the one that has the responsibility for
raising and maintaining the armed forces, and
that's the Congress of the United States.
briefed select members one of the ones that when it
finally got around to we had to search industry to
see if industry could support what we wanted to do
in maintaining an army in building an army getting
helicopters building a tactical air force troop
carrier capability fighter aircraft that could
support the army new munitions and that sort of
stuff, to build a conventional capability
against this business of the great big umbrella
and all the wars going down under it, and which they
did. Korea was a conventional war under the big
umbrella. The nuclear umbrella. Sure. The same
thing in all other parts of the world. In Lebanon,
it's going on right today. Conventional war.
under the big umbrella. And what's the big
umbrella done about the nuclear strategic
capability done about those small conventional
wars? Not one damn thing.
So it's become obvious that what the hell we wanted
to do and what we had to do and what we still got to
work on very hard to keep this force together. And
we'd just gone through Korea where we'd been
pushed and shoved around all over the place
because of the total depleting of our capability
while Eisenhower was Chief of Staff of the Army.
And now here he is, President, and he's continued
to move to destroy his own damn service.
Well, you can understand why I have no regard for
him whatsoever.
And to have a sick president keep me from going to
Berlin, as far as I'm concerned, Eisenhower had a
major role in that. In 1945? In 1945. And it had been
a different world today.
Much a different world today. And so how did you,
and so the interest of the Army, and did Secretary
Stevens support you? Brucker. Brucker by this
time, yeah. Yeah. Okay. Secretary Brucker.
Secretary Brucker, one of the great civilian
supporters. When it came around to, when the
budget, when Eisenhower found his budget had been
changed, Certain things cut out and other things
added, military wise. Yeah, because of your
dealings with Congress? Absolutely. Okay. Tell
me about some of those dealings.
Well, many of those dealings went on at
night in dark alleys and in dark restaurants. And
budgets were looked at, and this cut out, and money
added here and there, and this weapons added in and
on and forth. And this was with the Center for Armed
Services Committee members? This came about
through the good judgment and the desire of people
who could understand and believed in what we were
trying to do in the authorization area. And one of
the great supporters was a young man who had the
know-how when we got around to finding out if the
civilian side could do this. A young senator who I
admire and respect forever and ever. I went to him
and said, sir, you know what we're trying to do, and
you believe in what we're trying to do. Can you
contact the civilian side or call them in to find
out whether or not industry can support this sort
of thing? And he said, I'll do it. His name was John
F. Kennedy. What a hell of a guy. And, of course,
he's the guy that proved off for me being— Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Mr. McNamara.
He could have, Mr. Kennedy could have asked Mr.
McNamara to put a civilian in there if he had wanted
to, but he didn't do that. So, Mr. McNamara would
have forged, and Mr. Hitch Mr. Ignatius, Mr. Tom
Morris, all of those were involved indirectly,
unbeknownst to them, I think.
But I thought Mr. McNamara's first move after the
Army diddled around for so long, he personally
selected General Ham Howes, who was here in Fort
Worth, to head up the Howes Board and start moving
in the direction in which these colonels had been
working. And we got the Air Cavalry Division and
all that. Magnus Meyer personally did that over
the head of the Army Chief of Staff, because the
Army Chief of Staff at that time was a man named
General Decker, who was a great hell of a golf
player. He could build a hell of a golf course, and
he was one hell of a fine guy, but let's just leave it
right there. Okay, well let's go back now to 1956.
So in other words, you were building
congressional support. for the type of army that
you thought was necessary.
You must have had a number of generals, even though
it's called the Colonel's Revolt, you must have
had a number of generals in the Pentagon who
encouraged you or supported your efforts. Sure
did. Maxwell D. Taylor
was interested in a strong army. I'm not going to
say that he participated in the Colonel's revolt
because as far as I know, he didn't. And neither did
Dental Ridgeway. But they must have talked to you.
They talked to everybody about what we needed in
the way of an army. But they are hereby at
the presidential selectees
as a three-star general is. You serve in a
four-star. Now, by law, Title X, U.S. Code, the
highest grade you can attain is major general.
That's by law. However, the president may select
for a one assignment only. The president may
select people for promotion to three-star and
four-star. They're selected for only that
assignment. At the end of that assignment, they
have to go back to the grade of major general unless
the president so selects him for another
three-star slot. Unless that three-star slot
that he selected you for, at the time you leave this
three-star billet, If that three-star bill is
still occupied, even in transit, you revert back
to a major general. And the same is true with a
four-star. So, the three and four-stars are at the
pleasure of this particular assignment of the
president.